Tutorial: Using api metrics with prometheus (#109)
crate/cloud-getting-started: docs/cloud-monitoring.rst

.. _cloud-monitoring:

Cloud Monitoring
================

> This tutorial shows a way to monitor your CrateDB Cloud clusters using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial demonstrates how you can monitor your CrateDB Cloud
```

> using API metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using the exposed Prometheus metrics.
```

The visualization tool `Grafana`_ is used with `Prometheus`_ to

> scrape the API endpoints for the relevant metrics and visualize them. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scrape the API endpoint that exposes metrics and visualize them. The
```

system:

.. code-block::

  # my global config
  global:
    scrape_interval: 15s # Set the scrape interval to every 15 seconds. Default is every 1 minute.
    evaluation_interval: 15s # Evaluate rules every 15 seconds. The default is every 1 minute.
    # scrape_timeout is set to the global default (10s).

  # Alertmanager configuration
  alerting:
    alertmanagers:
      - static_configs:
          - targets:
            # - alertmanager:9093

  # Load rules once and periodically evaluate them according to the global 'evaluation_interval'.
  rule_files:
    # - "first_rules.yml"
    # - "second_rules.yml"

  # A scrape configuration containing exactly one endpoint to scrape:
  # Here it's Prometheus itself.
  scrape_configs:
    - job_name: "cratedb"
      metrics_path: '/api/v2/organizations/{{ORGID}}/metrics/prometheus/'
      basic_auth:
        username: '{{APIKEY}}'
        password: '{{SECRET}}'
      static_configs:
        - targets: ["console.cratedb.cloud"]

Substitute the ``ORGID`` with the ID of your organization. It can be found in
the Settings page in the CrateDB Cloud Console:

.. image:: /_assets/img/cloud-monitoring-org-id.png
   :alt: Organization ID

> API Key and Secret can be generated in your `account page`_ in the CrateDB

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An API Key and Secret can be generated in your `account page`_ in the CrateDB
```

Cloud Console.

Once you have added your Organization ID and API credentials, execute the following
command to create a Prometheus instance:

.. code-block:: console

  docker run -d --name prometheus -v /Users/crate/prometheus.yml:/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml -p 9090:9090 prom/prometheus

This will start the Prometheus instance exposed on port ``9090``. You can verify 
it's running correctly by visiting ``http://localhost:9090/``. 
On the ``Status -> Targets`` page in the top menu, you should see the
following:

.. image:: /_assets/img/cloud-monitoring-prometheus-verification.png
   :alt: Prometheus targets

There should be an endpoint with your Organization ID with state ``UP``. This
means that Prometheus is able to connect to the API and is scraping the
available metrics.

Grafana
-------

Grafana doesn't need any special configuration. You can run it either in a

> Docker container or as a local installation, it doesn't matter in this use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Docker container or as a local installation, it doesn't matter for this use
```

case. Follow the `Grafana documentation`_ and use your preferred method.

By default, Grafana is exposed on port ``3000``. Go to
``http://localhost:3000/`` to access it.

Data source
'''''''''''

Now you can add Prometheus as a data source in Grafana under ``Configuration
-> Data sources``. Choose Prometheus, use ``http://localhost:9090/`` as the

> URL, and leave the rest on default:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
URL, and leave the rest as default:
```

choose the file. The dashboard will be called "CrateDB Cluster Monitoring".

.. image:: /_assets/img/cloud-monitoring-grafana-dashboard.png
   :alt: Sample grafana dashboard

The dashboard displays the following metrics. The values are aggregated
from all the running clusters in your organization:

- **Global stats:**
    - Number of nodes

- **Clusters stats:**
    - Type and number of open connections to your clusters
    - SELECT queries per second
    - INSERT queries per second
    - CPU usage (Cores)
    - Memory usage
    - File system writes
    - File system reads

- **Query stats:**
    - Error rate along with the type of failed query
    - Average query duration along with the type of query
    - Queries per second along with the type of query

.. _account page: https://crate.io/docs/cloud/reference/en/latest/api.html
.. _Cloud Console: https://console.cratedb.cloud/?utm_campaign=2022-Q3-WS-Developer-Motion&utm_source=docs
.. _Grafana: https://grafana.com/
.. _Grafana documentation: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/installation/
.. _Prometheus: https://grafana.com/oss/prometheus/

> .. _this snippet: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/crate/cloud-tutorials/master/docs/_extra/cratedb-cloud-cluster-dashboard.json

Reviewer 2: This is currently a 404, do you need to merge something?

Author: Yes, the https://github.com/crate/cloud-tutorials/pull/110 dashboard is a separate PR.
